---
title: Essays Moral, Political, and Literary
publicationYear: 1753
author: Hume, David
date: 4/1/2007
tags:
    - Progress
    - Humanities
    - Sciences
    - Jonathan Franzen [person]
---

# On Whether Technology Brings Us Together

This is such a sweet dream about a future in which technology really would bring people closer together--not, as in modern versions of this story, that technology would be a medium for sociability, but that technology ("industry" and "refinements in the mechanical arts," which necessarily bring forth "refinements in the liberal") would banish ignorance, rouse the mind, produce such a surfeit of intellectual and material luxury that people would flock to crowded cities to share the surplus of their wealth and so contribute to each other's well being.  It's such a moment of preindustrial optimism, when "humanity" could be "inexorably" linked to industry and knowledge, and, even more apropos, that learning, wealth, and ease were seen naturally to encourage sociability.  Under the influence of Franzen's mildly dispetic view of posturban American society -- his (I think unexceptionable) opinion seems to be that technology and wealth have allowed us to indulge the desire for privacy, for the freedom from the inconveniences imposed by human contact, there's something particularly affecting about the notion that "refinement in the arts" would naturally lead to not only more harmonious, but more frequent social contact--that people in an advanced society would naturally want to spend more time rubbing elbows in crowded rooms--that the impulse toward isolation was fundamentally backward, a characteristic of barbarism.

From Hume's essay on Refinement in the Arts (269ff)

> Human happiness, according to the most received notions, seems to consist in three ingredients; action, pleasure, and indolence: And though these ingredients ought to be mixed in different proportions, according to the particular disposition of the person; yet no one ingredient can be entirely wanting, without destroying, in some measure, the relish of the whole composition.  Indolence or repose, indeed, seems not of itself to contribute much to our enjoyment; but, like sleep, is requisite as an indulgence to the weakness of human nature, which cannot support an uninterrupted course of business or pleasure.  That quick march of the spirits, which takes a man from himself, and chiefly gives satisfaction, does in the end exhaust the mind, and requires some intervals of repose, which, though agreeable for a moment, yet, if prolonged, beget a languor and lethargy, that destroys all enjoyment, Education, custom, and example, have a mighty influence in turning the mind to any of these pursuits; and it must be owned, that, where they promote a relish for action and pleasure, they are so far favorable to human happiness.  In times when industry and the arts flourish, men are kept in perpetual occupation and enjoy, as their reward, the occupation itself, as well as those pleasures which are the fruit of their labour.  The mind acquires new vigour; enlarges its powers and faculties; and by an assiduity in honest industry, both satisfies its natural appetites, and prevents the growth of unnatural ones, which commonly spring up, when nourished by ease and idleness.  Banish those arts from society, you deprive men both of action and of pleasure; and leaving nothing but indolence in their place, you even destroy the relish of indolence, which never is agreeable, but when it succeeds to labour, and recruits the spirits, exhausted by too much application and fatigue.
> Another advantage of industry and of refinements in the mechanical arts, is, that they commonly produce some refinements in the liberal; nor can one be carried to perfection without being accompanied, in some degree, with the other.  The same age, which produces great philosophers and politicians, renowned generals and poets, usually abounds with skillful weavers, and ship-carpenters.  We cannot reasonably expect, that a piece of woolen cloth will be wrought to perfection in a nation, which is ignorant of astronomy, or where ethics are neglected.  The spirit of the age affects all the arts; and the minds of men, being once roused from their lethargy, and put into a fermentation, turn themselves on all sides, and carry improvements into every art and science.  Profound ignorance is totally banished, and men enjoy the privilege of rational creatures, to think as well as to act, to cultivate the pleasures of the mind as well as those of the body.
> The more these refined arts advance, the more sociable men become: nor is it possible, that, when enriched with science, and possessed of a fund of conversation, they should be contented to remain in solitude, or live with their fellow-citizens in that distant manner, which is peculiar to ignorant and barbarous nations.  They flock into cities; love to receive and communicate knowledge; to show their wit or their breeding; their taste in conversation or living, in clothes or furniture.  Curiosity allures the wise; vanity the foolish; and pleasure both.  Particular clubs and societies are every where formed: Both sexes meet in an easy and sociable manner; and the tempers of men, as well as their behaviour, refine apace.  So that, beside the improvements which they receive from knowledge and the liberal arts, it is impossible but they must feel an encrease of humanity, from the very habit of conversing together, and contributing to each other's pleasure and entertainment.  Thus _industry, knowledge,_ and _humanity,_ are linked together by an indissoluble chain, and are found, from experience as well as reason, to be peculiar to the more polished, and, what are commonly denominated, the more luxurious ages.
